Add trimmed Linen to NNX guide (#4209)
google/flax: docs_nnx/guides/linen_to_nnx.rst

.. codediff::
  :title: Linen, NNX
  :sync:

  model = Model(256, 10)
  sample_x = jnp.ones((1, 784))
  variables = model.init(jax.random.key(0), sample_x, training=False)
  params = variables["params"]

  assert params['Dense_0']['bias'].shape == (10,)
  assert params['Block_0']['Dense_0']['kernel'].shape == (784, 256)

  ---

  model = Model(784, 256, 10, rngs=nnx.Rngs(0))

  # parameters were already initialized during model instantiation

  assert model.linear.bias.value.shape == (10,)
  assert model.block.linear.kernel.value.shape == (784, 256)

Training Step and Compilation
==========

Now we write a training step and compile it using JAX just-in-time compilation. Note a few differences here:

* Linen uses ``@jax.jit`` to compile the training step, whereas NNX uses ``@nnx.jit``.  ``jax.jit`` only accepts pure stateless arguments, but ``nnx.jit`` allows the arguments to be stateful NNX modules. This greatly reduced the number of lines needed for a train step.

> * Similarly, Linen uses ``jax.grad()`` to return a raw dictionary of gradients, wheras NNX can use ``nnx.grad`` to return an NNX model state of gradients. In NNX, here you need to use the split/merge API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Similarly, Linen uses ``jax.grad()`` to return a raw dictionary of gradients, wheras NNX can use ``nnx.grad`` to return the gradients of Modules as NNX ``State`` dictionaries. To use regular ``jax.grad`` with NNX you need to use the split/merge API
```

>   * If you are already using Optax optimizer classes like ``optax.adam(1e-3)`` and use its ``update()`` method to update your model params (instead of the raw ``jax.tree.map`` computation like here), check out `nnx.Optimizer example <https://flax-nnx.readthedocs.io/en/latest/nnx_basics.html#transforms>`__ for a much more concise way of training and updating your model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * If you are already using Optax optimizers like ``optax.adamw`` (instead of the raw ``jax.tree.map`` computation shown here), check out `nnx.Optimizer example <https://flax-nnx.readthedocs.io/en/latest/nnx_basics.html#transforms>`__ for a much more concise way of training and updating your model.
```

* In Linen, you need to explicitly define and pass in an argument ``training`` to control the behavior of ``nn.Dropout`` (namely, its ``deterministic`` flag, which means random dropout only happens if ``training=True``). In NNX, you can call ``model.train()`` to automatically switch ``nnx.Dropout`` to training mode. Conversely, call ``model.eval()`` to turn off training mode. You can learn more about what this API does at its `API reference <https://flax-nnx.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api_reference/flax.nnx/module.html#flax.nnx.Module.train>`__.

.. codediff::
  :title: Linen, NNX
  :sync:

  ...

  @jax.jit
  def train_step(key, params, inputs, labels):
    def loss_fn(params):
      logits = model.apply(
        {'params': params},
        inputs, training=True, # <== inputs
        rngs={'dropout': key}
      )
      return optax.softmax_cross_entropy_with_integer_labels(logits, labels).mean()

    grads = jax.grad(loss_fn)(params)

    params = jax.tree.map(lambda p, g: p - 0.1 * g, params, grads)
    return params

  ---

  model.train() # Sets ``deterministic=False` under the hood for nnx.Dropout

  @nnx.jit
  def train_step(model, inputs, labels):

>     def loss_fn(model):
>       logits = model(
> 
>         inputs, # <== inputs
> 
>       )
>       return optax.softmax_cross_entropy_with_integer_labels(logits, labels).mean()

Reviewer: Could be more appealing to show it like this to contrast how much simpler NNX is in this case.
```suggestion
    def loss_fn(model):
      logits = model(inputs)

      return optax.softmax_cross_entropy_with_integer_labels(logits, labels).mean()
```

    grads = nnx.grad(loss_fn)(model)
    _, params = nnx.split(model)
    params = jax.tree.map(lambda p, g: p - 0.1 * g, params, grads)
    nnx.update(model, params)

.. testcode:: Linen
  :hide:

  train_step(jax.random.key(0), params, sample_x, jnp.ones((1,), dtype=jnp.int32))

.. testcode:: NNX
  :hide:

  sample_x = jnp.ones((1, 784))
  train_step(model, sample_x, jnp.ones((1,), dtype=jnp.int32))

Collections and Variable Types
==========

One key difference between Linen and NNX APIs is how we group variables into categories. In Linen, we use different collections; in NNX, since all variables shall be top-level Python attributes, you use different variable types.

You can freely create your own variable types as subclasses of ``nnx.Variable``.

For all the built-in Flax Linen layers and collections, NNX already created the corresponding layers and variable type. For example:

>  * ``nn.BatchNorm`` creates ``batch_stats`` -> ``nnx.BatchNorm`` creates ``nnx.BatchStats``.
> 
>  * ``linen.Module.sow()`` creates ``intermediates`` -> ``nnx.Module.sow()`` creates ``nnx.Intermediates``. You can also simply get the intermediates by assigning it to a module attribute, like ``self.sowed = nnx.Intermediates(x)``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * ``nn.Dense`` creates ``params`` -> ``nnx.Linear`` creates ``nnx.Param``.
  * ``nn.BatchNorm`` creates ``batch_stats`` -> ``nnx.BatchNorm`` creates ``nnx.BatchStat``.
 * ``linen.Module.sow()`` creates ``intermediates`` -> ``nnx.Module.sow()`` creates ``nnx.Intermediates``. You can also simply get the intermediates by assigning it to a module attribute, like ``self.sowed = nnx.Intermediate(x)``.
```
BTW: in Linen this is also true, you can simply add an intermediate via `self.variable('intermediates' 'sowed', lambda: x)`

.. codediff::
  :title: Linen, NNX
  :sync:

  class Block(nn.Module):
    features: int
    def setup(self):
      self.dense = nn.Dense(self.features)
      self.batchnorm = nn.BatchNorm(momentum=0.99)
      self.count = self.variable('counter', 'count',
                                  lambda: jnp.zeros((), jnp.int32))

> 
>     @nn.compact

Reviewer: Add new line to align `__call__`s
```suggestion

    @nn.compact
```

    def __call__(self, x, training: bool):
      x = self.dense(x)

>       x = self.batchnorm(x, use_running_average=not training)
>       x = jax.nn.relu(x)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      x = self.batchnorm(x, use_running_average=not training)
      self.count.value += 1
      x = jax.nn.relu(x)
```

.. codediff::
  :title: Linen, NNX
  :sync:

  params, batch_stats, counter = (
    variables['params'], variables['batch_stats'], variables['counter'])
  print(list(params.keys()))       # ['dense', 'batchnorm']
  print(list(batch_stats.keys()))  # ['batchnorm']
  print(list(counter.keys()))      # ['count']

  # ... make arbitrary modifications ...
  # Merge back with raw dict to carry on:
  variables = {'params': params, 'batch_stats': batch_stats, 'counter': counter}

  ---

  graphdef, params, batch_stats, count = nnx.split(
    model, nnx.Param, nnx.BatchStat, Counter)
  print(list(params.keys()))       # ['batchnorm', 'linear']
  print(list(batch_stats.keys()))  # ['batchnorm']
  print(list(count.keys()))        # ['count']

  # ... make arbitrary modifications ...
  # Merge back with ``nnx.merge`` to carry on:
  model = nnx.merge(graphdef, params, batch_stats, count)

Using Multiple Methods
==========

> In this section we will take a look at how to use multiple methods in all three

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section we will take a look at how to use multiple methods in both
```

    def __init__(self, input_size, hidden_size, rngs):
      self.linear = nnx.Linear(hidden_size + input_size, hidden_size, rngs=rngs)
      self.hidden_size = hidden_size

    def __call__(self, carry, x):
      x = jnp.concatenate([carry, x], axis=-1)
      x = self.linear(x)
      x = jax.nn.relu(x)
      return x, x

    def initial_state(self, batch_size: int):
      return jnp.zeros((batch_size, self.hidden_size))

Next, we will define a ``RNN`` Module that will contain the logic for the entire RNN.

In Linen, we will use ``nn.scan`` to define a new temporary type that wraps
``RNNCell``. During this process we will also specify instruct ``nn.scan`` to broadcast
the ``params`` collection (all steps share the same parameters) and to not split the
``params`` rng stream (so all steps intialize with the same parameters), and finally
we will specify that we want scan to run over the second axis of the input and stack
the outputs along the second axis as well. We will then use this temporary type immediately
to create an instance of the lifted ``RNNCell`` and use it to create the ``carry`` and
the run the ``__call__`` method which will ``scan`` over the sequence.

> In NNX, we define a scan function ``scan_fn`` that will use the ``RNNCell`` defined
> in ``__init__`` to scan over the sequence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In NNX, we define a scan function ``scan_fn`` that will use the ``RNNCell`` defined
in ``__init__`` to scan over the sequence, and explicitly set ``in_axes=(nnx.Carry, None, 1)``,
``Carry`` means that the ``carry`` argument will be the carry, ``None`` means that ``cell`` will
be broadcasted across steps, and ``1`` means ``x`` will be scanned across axis 1.
```

.. codediff::
  :title: Linen, NNX
  :sync:

  class RNN(nn.Module):
    hidden_size: int

    @nn.compact
    def __call__(self, x):
      rnn = nn.scan(
        RNNCell, variable_broadcast='params',
        split_rngs={'params': False}, in_axes=1, out_axes=1
      )(self.hidden_size)
      carry = rnn.initial_state(x.shape[0])
      carry, y = rnn(carry, x)

      return y

  x = jnp.ones((3, 12, 32))
  model = RNN(64)
  variables = model.init(jax.random.key(0), x=jnp.ones((3, 12, 32)))
  y = model.apply(variables, x=jnp.ones((3, 12, 32)))

  ---

  class RNN(nnx.Module):
    def __init__(self, input_size: int, hidden_size: int, rngs: nnx.Rngs):
      self.hidden_size = hidden_size
      self.cell = RNNCell(input_size, self.hidden_size, rngs=rngs)

    def __call__(self, x):
      scan_fn = lambda carry, cell, x: cell(carry, x)
      carry = self.cell.initial_state(x.shape[0])
      carry, y = nnx.scan(
        scan_fn, in_axes=(nnx.Carry, None, 1), out_axes=(nnx.Carry, 1)
      )(carry, self.cell, x)

      return y

  x = jnp.ones((3, 12, 32))
  model = RNN(x.shape[2], 64, rngs=nnx.Rngs(0))

  y = model(x)

Scan over Layers
==========

> In general, lifted transforms of Linen and NNX should look the same. However, NNX lifted transforms is designed to be closer to their lower level JAX counterparts, and thus we throw away some assumptions in certain Linen lifted transforms. This scan-over-layers use case will be a good example to showcase it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, lifted transforms of Linen and NNX should look the same. However, NNX lifted transforms are designed to be closer to their lower level JAX counterparts, and thus we throw away some assumptions in certain Linen lifted transforms. This scan-over-layers use case will be a good example to showcase it.
```

Scan-over-layers is a technique in which, we want run an input through a sequence of N repeated layers, passing the output of each layer as the input to the next layer. This pattern can significantly reduce compilation time for big models. In this example, we will repeat the module ``Block`` for 5 times in a top-level module ``MLP``.

In Linen, we apply a ``nn.scan`` upon the module ``Block`` to create a larger module ``ScanBlock`` that contains 5 ``Block``. It will automatically create a large parameter of shape ``(5, 64, 64)`` at initialization time, and at call time iterate over every ``(64, 64)`` slice for a total of 5 times, like a ``jax.lax.scan`` would.

> But if you think closely, there actually wans't any ``jax.lax.scan`` operation at initialization time. What happened there is more like a ``jax.vmap`` operation - you are given a ``Block`` that accepts ``(in_dim, out_dim)``, and you "vmap" it over ``num_layers`` of times to create a larger array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But if you think closely, there actually isn't the need for ``jax.lax.scan`` operation at initialization time. What happened there is more like a ``jax.vmap`` operation - you are given a ``Block`` that accepts ``(in_dim, out_dim)``, and you "vmap" it over ``num_layers`` of times to create a larger array.
```

> This means that in NNX, since model initialization and running code are completely decoupled, we need to use ``nnx.vmap`` to initialize the underlying blocks, and then use ``nnx.scan`` to run the model input through them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In NNX we take advantage of the fact that model initialization and running code are completely decoupled, and instead use ``nnx.vmap`` to initialize the underlying blocks, and ``nnx.scan`` to run the model input through them.
```

      y, _ = ScanBlock(self.features, training)(x, None)
      return y

  model = MLP(64, num_layers=5)

  ---

  class Block(nnx.Module):
    def __init__(self, input_dim, features, rngs):
      self.linear = nnx.Linear(input_dim, features, rngs=rngs)
      self.dropout = nnx.Dropout(0.5, rngs=rngs)

    def __call__(self, x: jax.Array):  # No need to require a second input!
      x = self.linear(x)
      x = self.dropout(x)
      x = jax.nn.relu(x)
      return x   # No need to return a second output!

  class MLP(nnx.Module):
    def __init__(self, features, num_layers, rngs):
      @nnx.split_rngs(splits=num_layers)
      @nnx.vmap(in_axes=(0,), out_axes=0)
      def create_block(rngs: nnx.Rngs):
        return Block(features, features, rngs=rngs)

      self.blocks = create_block(rngs)
      self.num_layers = num_layers

    def __call__(self, x):
      @nnx.split_rngs(splits=self.num_layers)
      @nnx.scan(in_axes=(nnx.Carry, 0), out_axes=nnx.Carry)
      def forward(x, model):
        x = model(x)
        return x

      return forward(x, self.blocks)

  model = MLP(64, num_layers=5, rngs=nnx.Rngs(0))

There are a few other details to explain in this example:

> * **What is that `nnx.split_rngs` decorator?** This is because ``jax.vmap`` and ``jax.lax.scan`` requires a list of RNG keys if each of its internal operations needs its own key. So for the 5 layers inside ``MLP``, it will split and provide 5 different RNG keys from its arguments before going into the JAX transform.

Reviewer: Added explanation
```suggestion
* **What is that ``nnx.split_rngs`` decorator?** NNX transforms are completely agnostic of RNG state, this makes them behave more like JAX transforms but diverge from the Linen transforms which do handle RNG state. To regain this functionality, the ``nnx.split_rngs`` decorator allows you to split the ``Rngs`` before passing them
to the decorated function and 'lower' them afterwards so they can be used outside.
  * This is needed because ``jax.vmap`` and ``jax.lax.scan`` requires a list of RNG keys if each of its internal operations needs its own key. So for the 5 layers inside ``MLP``, it will split and provide 5 different RNG keys from its arguments before going into the JAX transform.
```
